\chapter{Representation of vortex variability in climate models}
\label{cha:models}


\section{Introduction}


Over the past decade an increasing number of climate models have included a
well-resolved stratosphere, with model lids above the stratopause. For example,
the fifth Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5) \citep{Taylor2012}
includes 15 models with an uppermost level above the stratopause, whereas the
previous intercomparison project, CMIP3, includes only 5
\citep{Cordero2006}. The CMIP5 model simulations are significant in that they
are motivated by, and evaluated in the the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) \citep{Stocker2013}. This change in
model stratospheric resolution has been largely motivated by an increased
understanding of the stratosphere's influence on tropospheric climate (discussed
in \citet{Gerber2012} and Chapters \ref{cha:introduction} and
\ref{cha:moments}).

The effect of this greater stratospheric resolution was studied by
\citet{Charlton-Perez2013}, who compared stratospheric variability between
high-top and low-top models within the CMIP5 ensemble (they defined ``high-top''
as a model lid above 1~hPa, and ``low-top'' below). They found that the low-top
models have a weaker and less realistic representation of daily to interannual
polar stratospheric variability than high-top models. They attribute this to the
fact that the low-top models simulate fewer SSW events than high-top. This is
combined with a slightly weaker tropospheric NAM response in the two months
following SSW events in the low-top compared to high-top models.

These results are supported by similar studies which compare high and low-top
versions of the same model. \citet{Cagnazzo2009} found that a high-top model
gave a more realistic representation of the influence of ENSO on the NH
extratropical stratosphere. Similarly, \citet{Hardiman2012a} showed the
influence of the QBO on the extratropics as well as decadal trends in the NAO
were more realistically simulated by the high-top than the low-top model. These
differences have again been linked to the different simulation of SSW events in
high- and low-top models \citep{Sassi2010}. 

Other studies have compared simulations of climate change with high- and low-top
models. \citet{Huebener2007} linked a increased weakening of the stratospheric
polar vortex in high-top similations to a more southward shift of the NH winter
storm track, which in turn affects trends in North Atlantic temperatures and
precipitation. \citet{Manzini2014} investigated climate change simulations of
high- and low-top models in the CMIP5 ensemble. They found that the inter-model
spread in the simulation of changes of stratospheric polar vortex winds accounts
for a significant fraction of the inter-model spread of trends in the surface
NAM under climate change. Interestingly, \citet{Manzini2014} also show that
global surface temperature trends under climate change (and so climate
sensitivity) are larger for high-top compared to low-top models. However, when
comparing pairs of high- and low-top versions of the same (or similar) models,
little in climate sensistivity difference is detected, and they conclude that
this difference is unlikely to have a physical basis.

Despite these findings about the differences between high- and low-top models,
it is important to note that a model lid above the stratopause is not a
sufficient condition for the accurate representation of stratospheric processes
or stratosphere-troposphere coupling. Indeed, \citet{Charlton-Perez2013} found
that the frequency of SSWs in high-top CMIP5 models varies widely, from about
2.5 to 8 events per decade. 

In this chapter we apply the methods developed in Chapter \ref{cha:moments} to
evaluate the representation of stratospheric polar vortex variability in
contemporary climate models. We wish to perform as much as possible, a
like-for-like comparison, and so select only models with a lid height above the
stratopause. In doing this we extend the work of \citet{Charlton-Perez2013} to
consider the two-dimensional structure of the polar vortex, including split and
displaced vortex events. We also consider the influence of these events on the
troposphere in each model. 

There are three main objectives to this investigation. First, we wish to
evaluate the current state of model's representation of the stratospheric polar
vortex and stratosphere-troposphere coupling, including whether there are any
consistent biases among models. Second, we aim to determine if there is a
relationship between model parameters (such as horizontal and vertical
resolution) and biases in their representation of vortex variability. This may
motivate future model improvements to reduce these biases. Third, we investigate
whether the increased sample size of the CMIP5 ensemble can be used to better
understand the mechanism behind the different tropospheric response to split and
displaced vortex events, which was described in Chapter \ref{cha:moments}. 

\subsection{CMIP5 model simulations}

For this analysis, only climate models with a lid height above the stratopause
are selected from the CMIP5 ensemble. In total, 13 such models were available
from 8 different modelling centres, although another two (CESM1-WACCM and
MIROC-ESM) are listed in the CMIP5 ensemble, appropriate data was not found to
be available for these models in the CMIP5 archive
(http://pcmdi3.llnl.gov/esgcet/home.htm). These models are listed in Table
\ref{tab:models}. It can be seen that 12 of the 13 models have an uppermost
level which is in the upper mesosphere (70-80~km), but CanESM2 has a
significantly lower lid which is very close to the stratopause.

Historical simulations have been used throughout this analysis. These include
observed climate forcings, such as from greenhouse gasses, ozone depletion,
land-use change, tropospheric and stratospheric aerosols and solar
variability. The simulation period considered is limited to 1958-2005, so that
it coincides with the ERA-40/ERA-Interim reanalysis period (CMIP5 historical
simulations end at 2005), therefore allowing for a more direct comparison with
observations. In order to achieve the largest possible ensemble size, all
available ensemble members have been used for each model, which leads to a
differing number of years entering the ensemble from different models.

\begin{table}[htbp]
\small
\centering
\begin{tabular}{lcccccc} \hline
Model          & Ensemble size & Lid/ km & Levels & dh/km & d$z_{1}$/km & d$z_{2}$/km \\ \hline
CanESM2        & 5 & 48.1    & 35     & 268          & 1.48         & 2.30          \\
CMCC-CESM      & 1 & 80.6    & 39     & 536          & 1.49         & 1.89          \\
CMCC-CMS       & 1 & 80.6    & 95     & 268          & 0.65         & 0.68          \\
GFDL-CM3       & 5 & 76.3    & 48     & 191          & 1.32         & 1.75           \\
HadGEM2-CC     & 3 & 84.1    & 60     & 144          & 0.82         & 1.18          \\
IPSL-CM5A-LR   & 5 & 70.4    & 39     & 254          & 1.21         & 1.75          \\
IPSL-CM5A-MR   & 3 & 70.4    & 39     & 169          & 1.21         & 1.75          \\
IPSL-CM5B-LR   & 1 & 70.4    & 39     & 254          & 1.21         & 1.75          \\
MIROC-ESM-CHEM & 1 & 87.8    & 80     & 399          & 0.77         & 0.73          \\
MPI-ESM-LR     & 3 & 80.6    & 47     & 268          & 0.87         & 1.70            \\
MPI-ESM-MR     & 3 & 80.6    & 95     & 268          & 0.65         & 0.68          \\
MRI-CGCM3      & 1 & 80.6    & 48     & 107          & 0.88         & 1.87          \\
MRI-ESM1       & 1 & 80.6    & 48     & 107          & 0.88         & 1.87 \\ \hline 
\end{tabular}
\caption[CMIP5 model parameters.]{Parameters of the CMIP5 models studied in this
  chapter. Where the model lid is defined in terms of a pressure, its height was
  estimated using $z=-H\mathrm{ln}(p/p_{0})$ with $H=7$~km and
  $p_{0}=1000$~hPa. Horizontal resolution, d$h$, is estimated at 45$^{\circ}$N
  and vertical resolution is shown averaged over two regions; 5-15~km (d$z_{1}$)
  and 15-30~km (d$z_{2}$).} 
\label{tab:models}
\end{table}




\section{Vortex mean state and variability}
\subsection{Moment diagnostics}
\label{sec:moment-diagnostics}

\begin{figure}[htbp]
 \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/chapter-models/moments_stats1.pdf}
 \caption[Distributions of moment diagnostics for the CMIP5
 models.]{Distributions of centroid latitude and aspect ratio for the ERA (grey
   lines) (a) and the CMIP5 models (red lines). Joint distributions are shown
   with a logarithmic scale such that red squares represent the densest
   regions.}
 \label{fig:cmip5_moments_stats}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[htbp]
 \ContinuedFloat
 \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/chapter-models/moments_stats2.pdf}
 \caption[]{(Continued)}
\end{figure}


The centroid latitude and aspect ratio moment diagnostics are calculated for
each of the CMIP5 models over DJFM from the 10~hPa geopotential height field,
using the method described in Section \ref{sec:vort-geom-calc}. For each model
the value of the DJFM mean geopotential height at 60$^{\circ}$N and 10~hPa is
used to define the appropriate contour for the calculation of the moment
diagnostics. This accounts for biases in the mean geopotential height between
different models.

The resulting joint distributions of daily centroid latitude and aspect ratio
from each of the models are shown in Figure \ref{fig:cmip5_moments_stats}, along
with that from the ERA-40/ERA-Interim reanalysis (hereafter ERA) calculated in
Chapter \ref{cha:moments}. For each model the joint distribution histogram is
plotted with a logarithmic colour scale which is normalised according to the
number of days entering each box. As discussed in Chapter \ref{cha:moments}, it
can be seen that the joint distribution for ERA has an approximately triangular
distribution with high aspect ratio/poleward centroid latitude, and low aspect
ratio/equatorward centroid latitude being relatively more common than
high aspect ratio/equatorward centroid latitude. This shape of distribution is
well replicated by most of the models, although CanESM2 has a significantly
different shape, with the high aspect ratio/equatorward centroid latitude being
more common. 

No clear consistent biases among models emerge from this analysis. CanESM2 has a
modal centroid latitude which is about $5^{\circ}$ too far equatorward compared
to reanalysis. Contrastingly, GFDL-CM3 has a modal centroid latitude about
$2.5^{\circ}$ more poleward than observed. CMCC-CESM displays a clear bias in
the aspect ratio, with a distribution much less skewed towards high values than
in reanalysis.

The winter seasonal cycle of aspect ratio and centroid a latitude in the CMIP5
models is shown in Figure \ref{fig:cmip5_moments_stats_seas}. For the mean
aspect ratio and centroid latitude, the majority of models agree well with
reanalysis. CMCC-CESM has a consistently too low mean aspect ratio, while
GFDL-CM3 has a consistently too poleward mean centroid latitude, indicating that
these biases are not strongly seasonally dependent. On the other hand, the large
equatorward bias in the CanESM2 mean centroid latitude is much larger in
December and early January than later in winter. The 95th percentile of aspect
ratio is lower than reanalysis for the majority of models throughout the season,
indicating that models have, on average, too little variability in aspect ratio
 
\begin{figure}
 \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/chapter-models/moments_seasonal_stats.pdf}
 \caption[Seasonal cycle of moment diagnostics in the CMIP5 models]{Seasonal
   cycle of aspect ratio and centroid latitude in ERA (black) and the CMIP5
   models (colours). Thick lines represent the mean and thin lines the 95th or
   5th percentile for aspect ratio and centroid latitude respectively.}
 \label{fig:cmip5_moments_stats_seas}
\end{figure}


\subsection{Displaced and split vortex events}

Displaced and split vortex events are identified within the CMIP5 ensemble using
the threshold-based method described in Section \ref{sec:event-definition}. The
same thresholds as used for ERA (66$^{\circ}$N for centroid latitude and 2.4 for
aspect ratio) are used for the models in order to identify, as much as possible,
geometrically equivalent events. The same persistence of 7 days was also used.
The frequency of displaced and split vortex events for each model is shown in
Figure \ref{fig:cmip5_events_bar_stacked}.

\begin{figure}[htbp]
 \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/chapter-models/events_bar_stacked.pdf}
 \caption[Frequency of split and displaced vortex events in the CMIP5
 models]{Frequency of split and displaced vortex events in the CMIP5 models,
   ERA, and the multi-model mean (MMM). Error bars are for the frequency of all
   events, and represent one $\sigma$ range, assuming a binomial distribution of
   events. The grey shaded region represents the one $\sigma$ range for ERA,
   along with the mean (dashed line.) }
 \label{fig:cmip5_events_bar_stacked}
\end{figure}

The total frequency of displaced and split vortex events for each of the CMIP5
models agrees well with the equivalent SSW frequency calculated by
\citet{Charlton-Perez2013}, who identified events based on the reversal of
zonal-mean zonal wind at 60$^{\circ}$N and 10~hPa. They also found HadGEM2-CC to
have the highest frequency of events within the CMIP5 ensemble, while MRI-CGCM3
is the model with the lowest freqency of SSWs in their study (exluding GFDL-CM3
and MRI-ESM1 which \citet{Charlton-Perez2013} did not analyse, MRI-CGCM3 is the
second-lowest frequency in the present study). This similarlity between
\citet{Charlton-Perez2013} and the present study indicates that the close
relationship between moment diagnostics-defined events and SSWs defined by
zonal-mean zonal wind, as described in Chapter \ref{cha:moments}, also holds for
climate models (although this is not explicitly studied here).

As well as the large differences in the total frequency of displaced and split
vortex events, it can be seen in Figure \ref{fig:cmip5_events_bar_stacked} that
the ratio of frequencies of these events varies significantly between
models. For instance CanESM2 and CMCC-CESM simulate almost entirely displaced
vortex events, while IPSL-CM5B-LR and GFDL-CM3 simulate almost entirely split
vortex events. In the multi-model mean (MMM) these biases largely cancel, to
give a approximately equal ratio of displaced to split vortex events, which is
in agreement with reanalysis.

The seasonal distribution of these displaced and split vortex events is
illustrated in Figure \ref{fig:cmip5_events_seasonal}. Some models (CMCC-CMS,
HadGEM2-CC and IPSL-CM5A-LR) replicate the observed distribution, with split
vortex events being more likely in early winter, and displaced vortex events in
late winter. Other models, however, have a very different
distribution of events. CanESM2, CMCC-CESM and MPI-ESM-LR all show little
seasonal variability in the frequency of events. 


\begin{figure}
 \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/chapter-models/events_seasonal.pdf}
 \caption[Seasonal distribution of splits and displacements in the CMIP5
 models]{Seasonal distribution of the occurrence of split and displaced vortex
   events in ERA (a) and the CMIP5 models.}
 \label{fig:cmip5_events_seasonal}
\end{figure}

\bigskip It is now considered how model biases in the climatology of the
stratospheric polar vortex, discussed in Section \ref{sec:moment-diagnostics},
affect the frequency of split and displaced vortex events. The climatological
average state of the vortex is defined by the mode -- the peak of the
probability distribution function -- of the aspect ratio and centroid
latitude. Unlike the mean, this quantity is not affected by extreme values and
it represents the average, undisturbed, state of the vortex. The peak can be
estimated by the maximum value of a histogram, however this introduces
significant random errors and is sensitive to the selection of bin size. A more
accurate estimation of the mode can be made by fitting the aspect ratio and
centroid latitude with a theoretical distribution and then finding the peak of
that distribution. Following \citet{Mitchell2011}, we fit the aspect ratio with
a generalized extreme value (GEV) distribution of the form
\begin{equation}
f(x;\mu,\sigma,\xi) = \frac{a^{(-1/\xi)-1}}{\sigma}\mathrm{e}^{{-a}^{-1/\xi}}
\quad , 
\end{equation}
with
\begin{equation} 
a = 1 + \xi \frac{x-\mu}{\sigma} \quad ,
\end{equation}
where $\mu$ determines the position of the peak along the $x$-axis, $\sigma$
determines the variance of the distribution and $\xi$ the skewness. These
parameters are determined using the method of maximum-liklihood estimation
\citep{Wilks}. This method is also used to fit a Gaussian distribution of the
form
\begin{equation}
f(x;\mu,\sigma) = \frac{1}{\sigma\sqrt{2\pi}} \left(
  -\frac{(x-\mu)^2}{2\sigma^{2}} \right) \quad ,
\end{equation}
where $\mu$ determines the position of the peak along the $x$-axis and $\sigma$
is the standard deviation, to the cube of the centroid latitude, and then the
cube root taken to return the original distribution. \citet{Mitchell2011} found
that these distributions accurately fit the histograms of centroid latitude and
aspect ratio in reanalysis data, apart from the extreme tails of the
distribution. Qualitative inpsection of the distribution for each model confirms
that they also provide a similarly good fit to each of the model's histograms.

Figure \ref{fig:cmip5_moments_scatter} shows the relationship between the modal
aspect ratio and cetroid latitude and frequency of split and displaced vortex
events. It can be seen that strong linear relationships exist, with the modal
aspect ratio accounting for 79\% of the spread in the frequency of split vortex
events and the modal centroid latitude accounting for 76\% of the spread in the
frequency of displaced vortex events. This demonstrates that biases in the
average undisturbed state of the vortex account for the vast majority of
inter-model spread in the representation of extremes. An implication of this is
that the models accurately represent the variability of aspect ratio and
centroid latitude, relative to the model climatology. 

It can also be seen in Figure \ref{fig:cmip5_moments_scatter} that the values for
ERA lie very close to the best fit lines of the CMIP5 models. This implies that
the accuracy of a model's representation of the frequency of displaced and split
vortex events can be significantly improved by a more accurate average
undisturbed vortex state. Furthermore, while the ERA value for modal centroid
latitude lies approximately in the middle of that for the CMIP5 models, only two
models have a larger modal aspect ratio than ERA, indicating that a too circular
vortex is a common bias among models. 

\begin{figure}
 \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/chapter-models/CMIP5_moments_scatter.pdf}
 \caption[Comparison of moment diagnostics and frequency of split and displaced
 vortex events.]{Comparison of the DJFM mean aspect ratio with frequency of
   split vortex events (a) and DJFM mean centroid latitude with frequency of
   displaced vortex events (b) in the CMIP5 ensemble and ERA. Linear best fits
   and the correlation coefficients for all the models are also shown.}
 \label{fig:cmip5_moments_scatter}
\end{figure}

The structure of the stratospheric polar vortex during split and displaced
vortex events in the CMIP5 ensemble is shown in Figure
\ref{fig:10hPa_GPH_comp}. This shows composites of 10~hPa geoopotential height
at the onset date of the events for each model. The absolute values of the
contours are different for each model due to differences in climatology,
although the spacing between contours remains constant. It can be seen that the
majority of models accurately reproduce splitting events occuring along the
$90^{\circ}$W-$90^{\circ}$E axis, and displacement events with a vortex shifted
towards Scandinavia and Siberia. CanESM2 is an exception to this, with split
vortex events which are elliptical but centred quite far from the pole. The
IPSL-CM5B-LR model also has a very different appearance of displaced vortex
events, although this composite only consists of three events so differences are
unlikely to be statistically significant. There is also significant inter-model
spread in the relative strengths of the Aleutian and Azores highs during split
vortex events. Several models (GFDL-CM3, IPSL-CM5A-LR, IPSL-CM5B-LR, MRI-ESM1)
show an approximately equal strength Aleutian and Azores highs, while others
(CMCC-CMS, HadGEM2-CC, IPSL-CM5A-MR, MPI-ESM-LR, MPI-ESM-MR, MRI-CGCM2) show a
weaker Azores high, which is more in agreement with reanalysis. The more
symmetrical Aleutian and Azores highs indicate a greater dominance of wave-2
activity in split vortex events than is found in observations, where not all
split vortex events are dominated by wave-2 activity \citep{Mitchell2013}. 

\begin{figure}
 \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/chapter-models/10hPa_GPH_composites.pdf}
 \caption[Composites of 10~hPa $Z$ at the onset date split and displaced vortex
 events in the CMIP5 models.]{Composites of 10~hPa $Z$ at the onset date of
   split (S) and displaced (D) vortex events in ERA (a,b) and the CMIP5
   models. The number of events entering the composite and their type are
   shown in the title of each plot. The contour interval is 0.3~km.}
 \label{fig:10hPa_GPH_comp}
\end{figure}




\section{Stratosphere-troposphere coupling}
\subsection{Zonal-mean response to displaced and split vortex events}

The time-height evolution of the atmosphere around split and displaced vortex
events in each of the CMIP5 models is displayed in Figure
\ref{fig:cmip5_dripping_paint}. This shows composites of polar cap
($60^{\circ}$-$90^{\circ}$N) geopotential height ($Z$) anomalies from 90 days
before to 90 days following events. The anomalies are calculated from the
climatology of each day for each model. The figures extend downwards only to
500~hPa (rather than 1000~hPa). This is because models differ in their
representation of geopotential height which is below ground level; some allow
negative values, while others set this as an undefined value. This introduces
significant errors in the calculation of a climatology and anomalies at levels
where the geopotential height is occasionally below ground level. It should be
noted that polar cap $Z$ is highly correlated with the NAM over the levels shown
in Figure \ref{fig:cmip5_dripping_paint}. Indeed, comparing Figures
\ref{fig:cmip5_dripping_paint} (a) and (b) with Figure \ref{fig:dripping_paint}
shows that the ERA composites for polar cap $Z$ and the NAM are very similar. In
Figure \ref{fig:cmip5_dripping_paint} the number of events entering each
composite is shown in the upper right-hand corner, and it should be noted that
composites of a small number of events are likely to be subject to significant
statistical uncertainty.

It can be seen that there are large inter-model differences in the evolution of
polar cap $Z$ following split and displaced vortex events. For some models
(e.g. CanESM2, CMCC-CMS) lower stratospheric anomalies persist for about 45
days, similar to reanalysis, while for others (e.g. IPSL-CM5A-LR, GFDL-CM3)
these persist for much longer, beyond 60 days. There are also differences in the
stratospheric precursors to events; while some models (e.g. CanESM2, GFDL-CM3,
MRI-CGCM3) simulate a stronger negative anomaly prior to displacement events,
simular to reanalysis, others (HadGEM2-CC, IPSL-CM5A-MR, MRI-ESM1), show more
negative anomalies prior to split vortex events. 

Most significantly, there is a large spread in the tropospheric anomalies over
the 10-90 days following split and displaced vortex events. Several models
(e.g. IPSL-CM5A-LR, IPSL-CM5A-MR, MPI-ESM-LR) show only very weak anomalies
below approximately 200~hPa, while others (e.g., CMCC-CESM, GFDL-CM3, MRI-ESM1)
show stronger anomalies. Among those models which do show stronger tropospheric
anomalies, there are also differences in the relative magnitude following split
and displaced vortex events. For instance, for GFDL-CM3, and MRI-ESM1
tropospheric anomalies following displaced vortex events are stronger, while for
MIROC-ESM-CHEM and MPI-ESM-MR anomalies following split vortex events are
stronger, which is more in agreement with reanalysis. 

As well as these large inter-model differences, there are also some consistent
features among models. Almost all models show a barotropic onset to split vortex
events, with anomalies occuring at the same time throughout the depth of the
atmosphere. In contrast, displaced vortex events apprear more baroclinic, with
onset occuring first near 10~hPa. This is consistent with the difference found
in reanalysis, indicating that this is likley to be a robust difference between
the response to split and displaced vortex events. These features are apparent
in the multi-model mean (MMM) (Figures \ref{fig:cmip5_dripping_paint}
C and D). This mean is calculated so as to give each event an equal weight (rather
than each model), and so does not give undue weight to models with only a small
number of events. On the other hand this does mean that greater weight is given
to models with more ensemble members and more events (almost one third of all
displaced vortex events come from CanESM2), but the difference in baroclinicity
of split and displaced vortex events is observed to be very consistent among
models.

\begin{figure}
 \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/chapter-models/dripping_paint1.pdf}
 \caption[NAM composites for splits and displacements in the CMIP5
 models]{Composites of normalised polar cap averaged $Z$ anomalies following
   split and displaced vortex events in ERA (a,b), the CMIP5 models, and the
   multi-model mean (C,D). Numbers in the upper right of each plot represent the
   number of events entering the composite.}
 \label{fig:cmip5_dripping_paint}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
 \ContinuedFloat
 \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/chapter-models/dripping_paint2.pdf}
 \caption[]{(Continued)}
\end{figure}


\subsection{Spatial response to displaced and split vortex events}

\begin{figure}
 \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/chapter-models/mslp_composites.pdf}
 \caption[MSLP composites following splits and displacements in the CMIP5
 models]{Composites of mean sea-level pressure anomalies averaged 0-30 days
   following split (S) and displaced (D) vortex events in the CMIP5
   ensemble. Also shown are the ERA composite (a,b) and the multi-model mean
   (C,D). The multi-model mean is calculated as to give each event an equal
   weighting.}
 \label{fig:cmip5_mslp_comp}
\end{figure}

Mean sea-level pressure (MSLP) anomalies averaged over the 30 days following
split and displaced vortex events for each of the CMIP5 models are displayed in
Figure \ref{fig:cmip5_mslp_comp}. Also shown are the anomalies for ERA (a,b)
(the same as Figure \ref{fig:mslp_composites}) as well as the multi-model mean
(c,d), again calculated so as to give each event an equal weight. The
climatology from which anomalies are calculated is determined by a 10-day
running mean of the average for each day of the year at each spatial
location. The number of events entering each composite is shown, and again, care
must be taken interpreting composites of a small number of events due to
statistical uncertainty.

Following both split and displaced vortex events, all models show a positive
MSLP anomaly near the North Pole, and a negative anomaly centred over Western
Europe and the North Atlantic. This pattern is consistent with a negative
projection onto the North Atlantic Oscillation. Less consistent among models are
anomalies over the North Pacific; many models (e.g. MRI-CGCM3, IPSL-CM5A-LR)
show positive anomalies, while MPI-ESM-LR a MPI-ESM-MR have negative anomalies
following both split and displaced vortex events. MIROC-ESM-CHEM has different
sign anomalies in the North Pacific following split (negative) and displaced
(positive) vortex events. In the multi-model mean, a weakly positive North
Pacific anomaly is seen.

This inconsistency in the Pacific anomalies has important consequences for the
interpretation of zonal mean anomalies following split and displaced vortex
events. For instance, the IPSL-CM5A-LR model shows weak tropospheric anomalies
(relative to other models) of polar cap averaged $Z$ following split and
displaced vortex events (Figure \ref{fig:cmip5_dripping_paint} (m,n)), but a
relatively strong NAO signal (Figure \ref{fig:cmip5_mslp_comp} (m,n)),
particularly following split vortex events. This is because the model also shows
relatively stong positive North Pacific anomalies, that to some extent cancel
the North Atlantic anomalies in the polar cap average. Such an effect would also
be seen in the NAM, since the surface NAM pattern (the leading EOF of MSLP) has
the same sign and simular magnitude in the North Atlantic and North Pacific
\citep[e.g.,][]{Ambaum2001}. 

A robust difference found between MSLP anomalies following split and displaced
vortex events in almost all models and the multi-model mean is that anomalies
over Russia and Eastern Europe are more strongly negative following displaced
vortex events. In the multi-model mean, this difference has a magnitude of about
2-3~hPa across most of Russia. In order to understand the possible stratospheric
influence on this difference, lower stratospheric anomalies are studied. Figure
\ref{fig:cmip5_100hPa_comp} shows composites of 100~hPa $Z$ averaged over the 10
days following the onset of split and displaced vortex events. This shorter time
period (rather than the 30 days used for the MSLP composites) is chosen to
represent the typical time scale of a split or displacement of the vortex, which
is shorter than the time scale taken for the re-formation of the vortex and
return towards the climatological mean. However, it should be noted that
composites taken over the 30 days show similar structure, but with reduced
magnitude (not shown). 

As well as the composite for each model, and the split minus displaced vortex
difference, a multi-model mean is also shown in Figure
\ref{fig:cmip5_100hPa_comp} (Q,R,S). Because this is a mean of model absolute
values, and models have different climatologies, the MMMs for split and
displaced vortices are scaled to have the same hemispheric mean magnitude. This
avoids introducing a bias in the climatology of any particular model into the
MMM difference. 

For all models (with the exception of CanESM2), the 100~hPa $Z$ split vortex
composite shows an elliptical vortex with the major axis aligned along the
$90^{\circ}$W-$90^{\circ}$E line which is similar to the composite at 10~hPa
(Figure \ref{fig:10hPa_GPH_comp}). For the displaced vortex composite the
100~hPa vortex is centred over Siberia for almost all models, eastward of the
10~hPa composite which is centred over Scandinavia. This again highlights the
more baroclinic nature of displaced vortex events compared to split vortex
events.

In the split minus displaced vortex difference, the majority of models show a
large positive region over Russia and Eastern Europe and a negative region
centred over northern Canada. The positive region over Siberia has a minumum,
which is negative in some cases, located near $90^{\circ}$E, which is consistent
with the position of minimum in the split vortex composite. It can be seen that
the multi-model mean difference (Figure \ref{fig:cmip5_100hPa_comp} (S)) is
remarkably similar to the reanalysis difference (Figure
\ref{fig:cmip5_100hPa_comp}), both in terms of the location and magnitude of
anomalies. This suggests that the CMIP5 models, on average, realistically
represent the evolution of split and displaced vortex events through the depth
of the stratosphere. Again, this result is consistent among the majority of
models, and so not highly sensitive to the exlusion or inclusion of any
particular model. 

\begin{figure}
 \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/chapter-models/100hPa_GPH1.pdf}
 \caption[NAM composites for splits and displacements in the CMIP5
 models]{Composites of 100~hPa geopotential height (km) averaged in the 10 days
   following the onset of split (S) and displaced (D) vortex events in ERA, each
   of the CMIP5 models, and the multi-model mean (MMM). The right hand column
   displays the difference of splits minus displacements. The multi-model mean
   is calculated so as to give each event an equal weighting.}
 \label{fig:cmip5_100hPa_comp}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
 \ContinuedFloat
 \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/chapter-models/100hPa_GPH2.pdf}
 \caption[]{(Continued)}
\end{figure}


\bigskip Figure \ref{fig:cmip5_mslp_diff} shows the split minus displaced vortex
composite difference for MSLP averaged 0-30 days following onset and the 100~hPa
$Z$ composite difference averaged 0-10 days following onset, for both ERA and
the CMIP5 MMM. Statistical significance in the MSLP difference is calculated by
a two-tailed bootstrap test, using the following procedure:
\begin{enumerate}
\item Group all events together and select from them, with replacement, two
  random subsets which are equal in size to the total number of split and
  displaced vortex events respectively. 
\item Take the difference of the averages of these two subsets. 
\item Repeat the above 5000 times to form a distribution of random composite
  differences. 
\item If the actual composite difference lies lower than the 2.5\% or
  higher than the 97.5\% levels of this distribution then it can be said there
  is a less than 95\% chance that the actual difference arises from random
  variability. 
\end{enumerate}
For the case of ERA, very little statistical significance in the
composite difference is seen, while in the CMIP5 MMM there are large
statistically significant regions. This is due to the greatly increased sample
size in CMIP5; a total of 943 events compared to just 35 in ERA. 

In the CMIP5 MMM difference the largest feature is the large positive anomaly (a
result of a more negative anomaly following displaced vortex events) over
Scandinavia, Eastern Europe and Russia. There is also a significant negative
anomaly over northern Canada and a positive anomaly in the western
Atlantic. This pattern is zonally assymetric and so does not project strongly
onto the polar cap average, therefore explaining the small difference in polar
cap averaged $Z$ (Figure \ref{fig:cmip5_dripping_paint} (C,D)). The CMIP5
difference pattern also does not strongly project onto the NAO as there is a
similarly negative NAO following both split and displaced vortex events (Figure
\ref{fig:cmip5_mslp_comp} (C,D)). For the ERA MSLP difference there are stronger
negative anomalies over Europe (although not statistically significant) and
positive anomalies over the North Pole, which does project more strongly onto
the NAO, as discussed in Section \ref{sec:moments_analysis}. 

The CMIP5 difference of Figure \ref{fig:cmip5_mslp_diff} shows the positive
100~hPa $Z$ anomalies over Siberia over-lie the positive MSLP anomalies, while
the negative 100~hPa $Z$ over northern Canada over-lies negative MSLP
anomalies. A somewhat similar, but not statistically significant pattern is seen
in ERA, although the Siberian anomaly is more polewards and the negative anomaly
over Canada is much weaker. Significantly, the 100~hPa pressure surface lies
close to the tropopause, and 100~hPa $Z$ can therefore give an indication of
tropopause height. Indeed, comparing the 100~hPa $Z$ and tropopause height
anomalies for ERA (Figures \ref{fig:cmip5_100hPa_comp} (a,b) and
\ref{fig:tropopause_height} (c,d)) shows that anomalous negative $Z$ is
approximately co-located with an anomalously high tropopause, although the
tropopause height field is much noisier. 

The fact that anomalous MSLP differences are co-located wih 100~hPa $Z$ (which
is in turn related to tropopause height) lends weight to the idea that the
mechanism behind the \emph{differences} in the surface response to split and
displaced vortex events is a localised geostrophic and hydrostatic adjustment to
stretching caused by changes in tropopause height. This is the mechanism
discussed by \citet{Ambaum2002} and in Section ??. It is important to note that
this does not imply that this is the dominant mechanism in the \emph{individual}
response to split and displaced vortex events, which share many similarites, for
instance in their influence on the NAO. This result is discussed in more detail
in Section \ref{sec:cmip5_discuss_split_displ}.


\begin{figure}
 \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/chapter-models/mslp_diff.png}
 \caption[Difference of MSLP following split and displaced vortex
 events.]{Difference (S-D) of composites of mean sea-level pressure averaged
   0-30 days following split (S) and displaced (D) vortex events in ERA and the
   CMIP5 ensemble. Stippling indicates regions that are $>$95\% significant
   according to a two-tailed bootstrap test. Grey contours represent the
   difference in 100~hPa geopotential height averaged 0-10 days following events
   the contour interval is 40~m, dashed contours represent negative values and
   the lowest magnitude contours are $\pm$20~m. }
 \label{fig:cmip5_mslp_diff}
\end{figure}





\section{Discussion}
\subsection{Inter-model differences}

\subsection{Difference between split and displaced vortex events}
\label{sec:cmip5_discuss_split_displ}
%Discuss NAO vs NAM

\begin{figure}
 \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/chapter-models/scatter_matrix.pdf}
 \caption[Relationship between model resolution and split and displaced vortex
 events in the CMIP5 models.]{Relationship between model resolution and
   representation of split and displaced vortex events in the CMIP5
   models. Model resolution is shown as horizontal resolution ($\mathrm{d}h$),
   vertical resolution ($\mathrm{d}z$) over 5-15~km and 15-30~km, and aspect
   ratio ($\mathrm{d}z$(5-15~km)$ / \mathrm{d}h$. Also shown is the number of
   SSWs per decade, the fraction of SSWs that are splits, and the average NAM at
   500~hPa 0-30 days following SSWs. Histograms for the relevant quantities
   are shown along the leading diagonal.}
 \label{Fig2}
\end{figure}

\section{Conclusions}

% Re-address aims from introduction

%%% Local Variables:
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "thesis"
%%% End:
