\chapter{The role of the stratosphere in seasonal prediction}
\label{cha:seas}

\begin{quotation}
  Most of work in this chapter which relates to the Southern Hemisphere was
  published in \emph{Journal of Climate} \citep{Seviour2014}.
\end{quotation}


\section{Introduction}


Accurate prediction of the atmospheric circulation several months in advance
relies on the presence of low-frequency predictable signals in the climate
system. It has now been demonstrated that the stratosphere is an important
pathway for the communication of predictable tropical signals across the globe;
in particular, the El Ni\~no-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) \citep{Bell2009,
  Ineson2009, Hurwitz2011}, Quasi-Biennial Oscillation (QBO)
\citep{Marshall2009, Garfinkel2011}, and 11-year solar cycle \citep{Haigh2003,
  Gray2013}. These teleconnections allow for the possibility of significant
predictability in regions remote from the direct effect of the signal. Despite
this, many operational seasonal forecast models include only a poor
representation of the stratosphere \citep{Maycock2011}, and it has been
suggested that this contributes to their lack of seasonal forecast skill in the
extratropics \citep{Smith2012}.

Furthermore, because stratospheric anomalies persist for longer than those in
the troposphere and can influence surface weather patterns
\citep[e.g.,][]{Baldwin2001a}, the initial conditions of the stratosphere itself
can act as a source of enhanced predictability \citep{Baldwin2003a,
  Charlton2003, Hardiman2011}. The effect of the stratosphere on the troposphere
is especially pronounced following SSW events, and past work has focused on the
influence of these events on forecast skill. For instance, both
\citet{Kuroda2008} and \citet{Sigmond2013} found that enhanced tropospheric
predictability can be obtained if forecasts are initialised at the onset of SSW
events. However, SSWs are highly nonlinear events which are not predictable
beyond about two weeks in advance in current forecast systems
\citep{Marshall2010}, limiting their usefulness in seasonal prediction. SSWs
also occur almost exclusively in the Northern Hemisphere (NH), with only one
event in the approximately 60 year record having been observed in the Southern
Hemisphere (SH), in September 2002 \citep{Roscoe2005}.

The rarity of SSWs in the SH is a result of less dynamical forcing from
vertically propagating planetary waves in the SH relative to the NH
stratosphere. This, in turn, comes about because of lesser SH orography and
land-sea temperature contrasts which can excite planetary waves. This reduced
variability also means that anomalies in the Antarctic stratosphere persist for
longer than those in the Arctic \citep{Simpson2011}. Hence, the SH stratospheric
circulation may be predictable on longer time scales, and thus more useful for
seasonal forecasts despite the lack of SSWs. Indeed, \citet{Thompson2005} and
\citet{Son2013a} have found that smaller-amplitude variations in the Antarctic
stratospheric polar vortex are followed by coherent temperature and pressure
anomalies at the Earth's surface which resemble the Southern Annular Mode (SAM)
pattern. These observations led \citet{Roff2011} to find that improved forecasts
of the SAM up to 30 days ahead may be achieved with a stratosphere-resolving
model. The SAM is the dominant mode of variability of the extratropical Southern
Hemisphere sea-level pressure and affects the position of storm tracks,
rainfall, surface air temperature, and ocean temperatures across the
extratropics \citep[e.g.,][]{Silvestri2003, Reason2005, Hendon2007}. As such,
there are considerable societal benefits, and interests in its prediction
\citep{Lim2013}.

Another reason for interest in the prediction of the Antarctic stratosphere is
the interannual variability in springtime ozone depletion, which can
significantly affect the amount of harmful ultraviolet radiation reaching the
Earth's surface over the Southern Hemisphere. The magnitude of this interannual
variability is a significant fraction of the magnitude of long-term depletion
caused by emission of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and other ozone-depleting
substances. While ozone-depleted air is confined over the polar region by the
stratospheric polar vortex during winter and spring (resulting in the ozone
hole), this air is released to mid-latitudes following the ultimate breakdown of
the vortex (final warming) in late spring/early summer. The extent of the
resulting summertime ozone depletion is largely determined by the total deficit
in ozone over the Antarctic during spring \citep{Bodeker2005}.

\citet{Salby2012} have shown that interannual variations in Antarctic ozone
depletion are highly correlated with changes in planetary wave forcing of the
stratosphere. They found that the anomalous vertical Eliassen-Palm (EP) flux (a
measure of meridional eddy heat flux) at 70~hPa poleward of 40$^{\circ}$S during
August-September explains almost all the interannual variance of anomalous ozone
depletion during September--November. Using this relationship, they postulate
that accurate prediction of planetary wave forcing could allow skillful seasonal
forecasts of ozone depletion.

The influence of planetary wave forcing on ozone depletion comes about through
both chemical and dynamical mechanisms. Planetary wave breaking causes an
increase of the strength of the stratospheric residual mean meridional
circulation \citep{Haynes1991}, with a resultant increase in large-scale descent
and adiabatic warming over the pole. This warming inhibits the formation of
polar stratospheric clouds which have a vital role in the activation of halogen
species that cause the chemical depletion of ozone. The increased meridional
circulation as well as an enhancement of horizontal two-way mixing caused by
planetary wave breaking, also causes an increase in the dynamical transport of
tropical ozone-rich air to the polar regions, further increasing ozone
concentrations.  Breaking planetary waves can also modify the geometry of the
stratospheric polar vortex, stripping away elements of ozone-depleted air
\citep{Waugh1994}, or in the extreme case of the 2002 SSW causing the ozone hole
to split in two \citep{Charlton2005a}.

Here, we address directly the predictability of the stratospheric polar vortices
using a set of historical hindcasts (or historical re-forecasts) from a new
operational seasonal forecast system with a fully stratosphere-resolving general
circulation model. The system accurately simulates the climatology of the NH
stratospheric polar vortex including the aspect ratio and centroid
latitude. However, we find it does not skilfully predict the winter mean vortex
strength, the occurence of SSWs, or split and displaced vortex events. On the
other hand, we find significant skill in the prediction of the Antarctic
stratospheric polar vortex up to four months in advance, including for the 2002
SSW. Using the observed relationship between column ozone quantities and the
stratospheric circulation, we are then able to infer skillful predictions of
springtime ozone depletion, confirming the hypothesis of \citet{Salby2012}. This
exceeds the lead-time of other contemporary ozone forecasts, which are typically
no more than two weeks \citep{Eskes2005}. The forecast system also shows
significant levels of skill in the prediction of the surface SAM at seasonal
lead times. By studying the variation of hindcast skill with time and height, we
demonstrate that this skill is significantly influenced by the descent of
predictable stratospheric circulation anomalies.


\section{Seasonal forecast system}

The analysis in this paper is based on results from a set of hindcast
predictions produced by the Met Office Global Seasonal Forecast System 5
(GloSea5) \citep{MacLachlan2014}. This system is based upon the HadGEM3 coupled
general circulation model \citep{Hewitt2011}, with an atmospheric resolution of
0.83$^{\circ}$ longitude by 0.56$^{\circ}$ latitude, 85 quasi-horizontal
atmospheric levels and an upper boundary at 85~km. The ocean resolution is
0.25$^{\circ}$ in longitude and latitude, with 75 quasi-horizontal levels. For
the SON season used for the SH analysis, a 15-member ensemble of hindcasts was
run for each year in the period 1996--2009. For the DJF season used for the NH
analysis a longer 24-member ensemble is available for the winters
1992/1993--2011/2012. The hindcast length is approximately four months from three
separate start dates spaced two weeks apart and centered on 1st August (SON) or
1st November (DJF), with an equal number of members initialised on each start
date. Members initialised on the same start date differ only by stochastic
parameterisation of model physics \citep{Tennant2011}. Details of the hindcast
runs for these two seasons are summarised in Table \ref{tab:seas_runs}.

\begin{table}[h]
\centering
\begin{tabular}{llll} \hline
  Season & Hindcast period                & Initialisation dates & Ensemble size
  \\ \hline
  DJF    & 92/93--11/12 (20 years) & 25/10, 01/11, 09/11  & 24 (8 on each date) \\
  SON    & 1996--2009 (14 years)           & 25/07, 01/08, 09/08  & 15 (5 on each
                                                                   date) \\ \hline
\end{tabular}
\caption{Summary table of the two sets of hindcast simulations analysed.}
\label{tab:seas_runs}
\end{table}

Initial conditions for the atmosphere and land surface were taken from the
ERA-Interim reanalysis \citep{Dee2011}, and initial ocean and sea-ice
concentrations from the GloSea5 Ocean and Sea Ice Analysis, based on the FOAM
data assimilation system \citep{Blockley2013}. The ERA-Interim data are linearly
interpolated onto model levels between the surface and 64.56~km (near 0.1~hPa),
and the 64.56~km values are then replicated onto the four subsequent levels up
to 85~km. FOAM data are on the same grid as the ocean model. Beyond
initialization the model takes no further observational data, and contains no
flux corrections or relaxations to climatology. The model lacks interactive
chemistry, and ozone concentrations are fixed to observed climatological values
averaged over 1994--2005, including a seasonal cycle \citep{Cionni2011}.

\citet{Scaife2013} have shown that this seasonal forecast system produces highly
skillful forecasts of the North Atlantic Oscillation during the Northern
Hemisphere winter. The combined effects of ENSO, QBO and sea-ice
teleconnections, as well as the increased ocean resolution which has improved
the representation of Northern Hemisphere blocking events \citep{Scaife2011a},
contribute to this skill.

Hindcast accuracy is verified by comparison to the ERA-Interim reanalysis
\citep{Dee2011}. The ERA-Interim data set has been demonstrated to have
realistic representation of the stratospheric meridional circulation
\citep{Seviour2012, Monge-Sanz2013}. It also assimilates observations of ozone
concentrations, and this assimilation has been demonstrated to be in close
agreement with independent satellite data \citep{Dragani2011}.

\section{Northern Hemisphere results}

% NH data
% 8.5 events/decade - 3.5 splits, 5.0 displs 
% min 47% (01/02) max 100% (97/98) (any event in winter)

\begin{figure}[t]
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/zmzw_climatologies_nh.pdf}\\
  \caption[NH comparison of GloSea5 and ERA-Interim zonal-mean zonal wind
  climatologies.]{Time series of daily 10~hPa zonal-mean zonal wind
    ($\overline{U}$) at 60$^{\circ}$N for all GloSea5 ensemble members (a) and
    ERA-Interim (b) from 1992--2011. The thick black line indicates the mean,
    dark grey shading the interquartile range and light grey the 95th percentile
    range.}\label{fig:nh_zmzw_clim}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[t] \centering
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=0.7\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/GloSea_moments_histogram.pdf}\\
  \caption[Moment diagnostics for GloSea5.]{Distribution (see Figure
    \ref{fig:cmip5_moments_stats}) of the centroid latitude and aspect ratio
    diagnostics derived from geopotential height for all GloSea5 ensemble
    members (red lines) and ERA-Interim (grey lines) over 1992--2011. The joint
    distribution is plotted with a logarithmic colour scale such that red
    represents the densest regions.}\label{fig:nh_moments_glosea}
\end{figure}


\begin{figure}[t]
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/DJF_ZMZW_NH.pdf}\\
  \caption[DJF $\overline{U}$ anomalies for GloSea5.]{DJF mean anomalies of
    $\overline{U}$ at $60^{\circ}$N and 10~hPa for the GloSea5 ensemble mean and
    ERA-Interim. Black dots represent individual ensemble members. The
    correlation between the GloSea5 ensemble mean and ERA-Interim is $r=0.24$,
    which is not statistically significant from zero.}\label{fig:nh_zmzw_timeseries}
\end{figure}


\begin{figure}[t] \centering
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=0.7\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/SSW_ROC.pdf}\\
  \caption[ROC curve for the prediction of SSWs.]{Receiver operating
    characteristic (ROC) curve for the prediction of SSW events during DJF for
    1992--2011. SSWs are defined as a reversal to easterly $\overline{U}$ at
    60$^{\circ}$N 10~hPa, and must be separated by at least 30
    days.}\label{fig:sh_zmzw_clim}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[t] \centering
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/glosea_split_displ_ROC_any.pdf}\\
  \caption[ROC curves for the prediction of split and displaced vortex
  events.]{Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for the prediction of
    split (a) and displaced (b) vortex events in all GloSea5 ensemble members
    over 1992--2011. Split and displaced vortex events are identified from
    geopotential height-derived moment diagnostics using the method described in
    Chapter \ref{cha:moments}.}\label{fig:sh_zmzw_clim}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[t] \centering
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/NH_lag_height_corr.pdf}\\
  \caption[Lag-height correlation of NH polar cap geopotential
  height.]{Correlation of GloSea5 ensemble mean polar cap (60-90$^{\circ}$N)
    geopotential height anomalies ($Z'$) with ERA-Interim values from
    1996--2009, as a function of time and height. All values are smoothed with a
    30-day running mean before correlations are calculated. The contour interval
    is 0.1 and all colored regions are greater than zero at the 95\% confidence
    interval, using a bootstrap test at each time at height. The blue dashed
    line indicates the approximate polar cap mean tropopause level
    \citep{Wilcox2012}.}\label{fig:nh_pc_gph_corr}
\end{figure}




\section{Southern Hemisphere results}


\subsection{Stratospheric polar vortex}


The climatology of Antarctic stratospheric polar vortex winds in the GloSea5
hindcasts is compared to the ERA-Interim reanalysis climatology in Figure
\ref{fig:sh_zmzw_clim}. The strength of the stratospheric polar vortex is
measured by the zonal-mean zonal wind ($\overline{U}$) at 60$^{\circ}$S and
10~hPa, which is approximately the center of the mean position of the vortex in
the mid-stratosphere. The composite for the GloSea5 hindcasts is formed from all
the individual ensemble members over 1996--2009 (a total of 210), while that
from ERA-Interim is a composite of all years from 1979--2010 (a total of 32
years). It can be seen that the mean of the GloSea5 hindcasts agrees very
closely with ERA-Interim throughout the spring, with only a slight bias towards
weaker winds in August and September. The interquartile and 95th percentile
ranges of GloSea5 and ERA-Interim also agree well, although the ERA-Interim
values are noisier as would be expected from a sample size consisting of fewer
years.

\begin{figure}[t]
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/zmzw_climatologies_crop.pdf}\\
  \caption[Comparison of GloSea5 and ERA-Interim zonal-mean zonal wind
  climatologies.]{Time series of daily 10~hPa zonal-mean zonal wind
    ($\overline{U}$) at 60$^{\circ}$S for all GloSea5 ensemble members from
    1996--2009 (a) and ERA-Interim from 1979--2010 (b). The thick black line
    indicates the mean, dark gray shading the interquartile range and light gray
    the 95th percentile range. Individual time series of the ensemble member of
    GloSea5 for 2002 which simulated an SSW, and 1997 which simulated a
    near-SSW, and the year with an observed SSW (2002) are shown in
    red.}\label{fig:sh_zmzw_clim}
\end{figure}

The GloSea5 hindcast predictions of interannual variability of the Antarctic
stratospheric polar vortex winds are shown in Figure
\ref{fig:zmzw_ozone}(a). Anomalies are defined from the relevant climatology of
either GloSea5 or ERA-Interim. For GloSea5, this climatology is calculated from
the mean of each day across all ensemble members in all years, while for
ERA-Interim the climatology is the mean of each day, smoothed with a 30-day
running mean (in order to account for its increased noise due to the reduced
sample size). Results are shown for September--November (SON) averages,
corresponding to a 1 month average lead time. The correlation between the
GloSea5 ensemble mean and ERA-Interim is 0.73, which is statistically
significant from zero at the 99\% confidence level, and has a 95\% confidence
interval of (0.37,0.90). This correlation does not depend strongly on particular
years; the correlation remains significant at the 95\% level ($r=0.57$) if the
year 2002 (which has the greatest anomaly) is excluded. Significance is
calculated using a two-tailed bootstrap test, whereby the percentile of the
observed correlation is calculated from the distribution of correlations of a
large number ($\sim 10,000$) of pairs of time series formed by re-sampling with
replacement from the original time series. These significance tests make fewer
assumptions about the underlying structure of the data than parametric tests
\citep{Wilks}, and are used throughout this study.

\begin{figure}[t]
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/zmzw_ozone_crop.pdf}\\
  \caption[GloSea5 forecast skill for the stratospheric polar vortex strength
  and column ozone.]{(a) SON mean anomalies at 10~hPa and 60$^{\circ}$S in
    ERA-Interim and the GloSea5 hindcast ensemble mean. (b) SON mean polar cap
    averaged (60--90$^{\circ}$S) total column ozone anomalies from ERA-Interim
    and those derived from the GloSea5 anomalies as described in the
    text. Individual ensemble members are shown as black dots. Hindcasts are
    initialized near 1st August.}\label{fig:zmzw_ozone}
\end{figure}

The skill shown in Figure \ref{fig:zmzw_ozone}(a) cannot be accounted for by
persistence of initial anomalies. In fact, there is a negative correlation
between $\overline{U}$ on 9th August, when the last ensemble member is
initialised, and the SON mean ($r=-0.54$). Hence, a persistence forecast would
be negatively correlated with observed values. This relationship may be
consistent with ideas of a pre-conditioning of the polar vortex
\citep[e.g.,][]{McIntyre1983}. The standard deviation of all GloSea5 ensemble
members is $7.5~\mathrm{m~s^{-1}}$ and that of ERA-Interim is
$9.7~\mathrm{m~s^{-1}}$ indicating that the GloSea5 ensemble spread may be too
small. However, there are large uncertainties in these values due to the short
hindcast period and the large 2002 anomaly.

Following \citet{Charlton2007a}, SSWs are defined as a temporary reversal of
$\overline{U}$ at 60$^{\circ}$S and 10~hPa, occurring before the final
transition to summer easterlies (final warming). Under this definition, one SSW
event was simulated in the GloSea5 hindcasts, in 2002. A similar magnitude event
(in terms of departure from climatology) occurred in a 1997 ensemble member,
although $\overline{U}$ did not quite become easterly. Time series of
stratospheric polar vortex winds for these two events are shown in Figure
\ref{fig:sh_zmzw_clim}(a) along with the observed 2002 SSW in Figure
\ref{fig:sh_zmzw_clim}(b). It can also be seen in Figure
\ref{fig:sh_zmzw_clim}(a) that 2002 has the most anomalous stratospheric polar
vortex in the GloSea5 hindcasts, with 14 of 15 ensemble members simulating
negative anomalies, and the most negative ensemble mean. It is therefore
possible that an increased likelihood the 2002 event was to some degree
detectable about two months in advance, although it has not been determined
whether this predictability comes from a preconditioning of the vortex, as
suggested by \citet{Scaife2005c}, or the result of external forcing.

Both the SSW events simulated by GloSea5 were vortex displacement events, in
contrast to the vortex splitting event which occurred in 2002
\citep{Charlton2005a}. This is demonstrated in Figure \ref{fig:sh_ssws}, which
shows geopotential height in the mid-stratosphere at the date of minimum
$\overline{U}$ at 60$^{\circ}$S and 10~hPa, for the two simulated events in
GloSea5 and the observed event in ERA-Interim. The distinction between splitting
and displacement SSW events is important because it has been observed that
tropospheric anomalies are greater following vortex splitting events, at least
in the Northern Hemisphere \citep{Nakagawa2006, Mitchell2013}.

\begin{figure}[t]
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/ssws_crop.pdf}\\
  \caption[Comparison of GloSea5 and observed SSWs.]{Geopotential height at
    10~hPa on the date at which $\overline{U}$ at 60$^{\circ}$S and 10~hPa is at
    its minimum value, for the two GloSea5 ensemble members which simulate a SSW
    (a,b), and for ERA-Interim at the central date of the 2002 SSW (c). Units
    are km and the contour interval is 0.3~km.}\label{fig:sh_ssws}
\end{figure}

The timing of the final warming of the stratospheric polar vortex also has a
significant effect on stratospheric temperature and ozone concentrations
\citep{Yamazaki1987}, as well as on the coupling of the stratosphere to the
troposphere \citep{Black2007}. The predictability of these events was
investigated in GloSea5, but not found to be highly significant. This is
probably because the mean timing of the final warming is towards the end of the
four month hindcast simulation (around 20th November at 10~hPa), and the final
warming does not occur before the end of the hindcast for some ensemble members,
thereby introducing a bias in the mean.

\subsection{Ozone depletion}

GloSea5 does not include interactive ozone chemistry, so in order to make ozone
forecasts concentrations must be inferred from other meteorological
variables. Total ozone quantities over the Antarctic polar cap have been found
to be highly correlated with vertical EP flux poleward of 40$^{\circ}$S
\citep{Weber2011, Salby2012}. EP flux diagnostics are not routinely produced
directly by operational seasonal forecast systems and requires high frequency
output at high spatial resolution to calculate. However, vertical EP flux
dominates variability of the stratospheric polar vortex, so it may be possible
to use the strength of the vortex to infer ozone quantities.

SON mean total column ozone quantities area-weighted averaged over the polar cap
(60--90$^{\circ}$S) are shown in Figure \ref{fig:zmzw_scatter}(a) for
ERA-Interim and the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) satellite instrument
\citep{Kroon2008}. ERA-Interim data are highly correlated with TOMS, verifying
the accuracy of ERA-Interim against direct satellite measurements (TOMS values
are slightly higher than ERA-Interim; this is probably because TOMS cannot make
observations during the polar night). The long-term trend in polar cap total
column ozone is calculated by fitting a second-order polynomial to the
data. This long-term trend is due to changes in concentrations of CFCs and other
ozone-depleting substances, and largely unrelated to dynamical variability. On
the other hand, shorter-term interannual changes are strongly related to
dynamical variability. In Figure \ref{fig:zmzw_scatter}(b) anomalies of polar
cap total column ozone from the long-term trend are plotted against anomalies of
the SON mean $\overline{U}$ at 60$^{\circ}$S and 10~hPa. It can be seen that
these two quantities are highly correlated ($r=-0.92$), meaning polar vortex
variability explains approximately 85\% of the variance of polar cap total
column ozone anomalies.

\begin{figure}[t]
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/zmzw_ozone_scatter_crop.pdf}\\
  \caption[Relation between stratospheric polar vortex strenth and column
  ozone.]{(a) Time series of SON mean polar cap averaged (60-90$^{\circ}$S)
    total column ozone in ERA-Interim and the TOMS satellite instrument. The
    ERA-Interim data are fitted with a 2nd-order polynomial. (b) Anomalies of
    ERA-Interim column ozone from the polynomial fit plotted against SON mean
    anomalies at 10~hPa and 60$^{\circ}$S for each year from 1979--2009. UPDATED
    FOR LOOCV?} \label{fig:zmzw_scatter}
\end{figure}

This strong correlation makes it possible to use GloSea5 forecasts of polar
vortex winds to produce inferred predictions of polar cap total column ozone
quantities. This is carried out by a leave-one-out cross-validation procedure
\citep{Wilks}; the linear regression of ERA-Interim ozone and $\overline{U}$
anomalies for all years 1979--2009 except the hindcast year is used to produce
the hindcast for each ensemble member. Thus no information from the hindcast
year enters the hindcast itself. Figure \ref{Fig2}(b) shows the GloSea5 ozone
hindcasts along with the assimilated values from ERA-Interim. The correlation
between the GloSea5 ensemble mean and ERA-Interim is 0.73, which is
statistically significant at the 99\% level, and has a 95\% confidence interval
of $(0.38,0.91)$. Errors from the regression in Fig.\ \ref{Fig2}(b) for the
inferred ozone quantities for each ensemble member are small compared to the
spread between ensemble members, and so are not plotted in this figure.

\subsection{Southern Annular Mode}

The SAM index in both GloSea5 and ERA-Interim is depicted as the difference
between the normalized anomalies of zonally averaged mean sea-level pressure at
40$^{\circ}$S and 65$^{\circ}$S \citep{Gong1999}. These anomalies are calculated
from the respective climatologies of GloSea5 and ERA-Interim. The ERA-Interim
SAM index calculated in this way is also highly correlated with other measures
of the SAM, such as the station-based index of \citet{Marshall2003}. The GloSea5
hindcast skill for the prediction of the seasonal (SON) mean SAM index is shown
in Figure \ref{fig:sam_ts} . The correlation of the GloSea5 ensemble mean and
ERA-Interim is 0.64, which is statistically significant at the 95\% level, and
has a 95\% confidence interval of (0.18,0.92) confirming skillful prediction of
the SAM at 1 month average lead times. This is similar to the value for the
December--February (DJF) NAO correlation skill of 0.62 found by
\citet{Scaife2013} in the same seasonal forecast system. The 1-year lag
autocorrelation of the SON mean SAM is negative ($r=-0.36$), and accounting for
this by sampling pairs of consecutive years in the bootstrap test leads to a
narrower confidence interval than presented above. The variability of the SAM
simulated by GloSea5 is broadly realistic with a standard deviation of all
ensemble members of 0.98 compared to 0.90 in ERA-Interim over the same period.

The SAM is strongly related to surface temperatures over much of the SH
extratropics. Figure \ref{fig:mslp_tsrf_map}(a) shows the correlation of the SON
mean SAM from ERA-Interim over 1996--2009 with SON mean gridded station-based
surface temperature data from the HadCRUT4 data set \citep{Morice2012}. The
HadCRUT4 data set has been chosen to demonstrate the relationship between the
SAM and surface temperature because of the scarcity of temperature observations
in the Southern Hemisphere, meaning reanalysis data is poorly constrained in
many regions. The same relationship between surface temperatures and the SAM is
shown for the GloSea5 ensemble mean in Figure \ref{fig:mslp_tsrf_map}(b). Many
of the observed correlations are reproduced in the hindcasts, such as the
opposite signed correlations over east Antarctica and the Antarctic
Peninsula/Patagonia, as well as between eastern Australia and New Zealand. These
results are in agreement with \citet{Gillett2006} who analysed the temperature
patterns associated with the SAM over the longer observational record of
1957--2005.

\begin{figure}[t]
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/sam_crop.pdf}\\
  \caption[GloSea5 predictions of the SAM.]{SON mean Southern Annular Mode (SAM)
    index in individual GloSea5 hindcast ensemble members (dots), ensemble mean
    (dashed green curve) and ERA-Interim (solid green curve). The SAM is
    calculated from mean sea-level pressure data, and hindcasts initialized near
    1st August. The correlation of the ensemble mean and ERA-Interim values is
    0.64, which is statistically significant at the 99\%
    level.}\label{fig:sam_ts}
\end{figure}

The GloSea5 ensemble mean SON surface temperature correlation with HadCRUT4 is
shown in Figure \ref{fig:mslp_tsrf_map}(c). Also highlighted (black circles) are
the points with the strongest observed correlations with the SAM ($|r| > 0.5$).
Regions of significant positive correlations are found over east Antarctica,
Patagonia, New Zealand, and eastern Australia. These are regions which also have
a strong correlation with the SAM, indicating that the significant surface
temperature skill is related to skill in prediction of the SAM. On the other
hand, there are also some significant negative correlations in subtropical
regions, which may indicate a model bias in the temperature pattern associated
with the SAM in these regions.

\begin{figure}[t]
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/mslp_tsrf_maps_crop.pdf}\\
  \caption[Correlation of GloSea5 forecasts of sea-level pressure and
  temperature.]{(a) Correlation of the ERA-Interim SON mean SAM with SON mean
    HadCRUT4 gridded station-based temperature observations over 1996--2009. (b)
    Correlation of the SON GloSea5 ensemble mean hindcast SAM with the SON
    hindcast ensemble mean near-surface temperature. (c) Correlation of observed
    SON mean HadCRUT4 and hindcast GloSea5 ensemble mean temperature. In (c)
    only correlations which are significant from zero at the 95\% level
    according to a bootstrap test at each gridpoint are shown. Black circles
    represent points which have an observed correlation with the SAM with
    magnitude greater than 0.5.}\label{fig:mslp_tsrf_map}
\end{figure}


\subsection{Stratosphere-troposphere coupling}

It is now investigated whether the statistically significant skill in hindcasts
of the stratospheric polar vortex affects that of the surface SAM. Forecast
skill as a function of lead-time and height is studied for polar cap
(60-90$^{\circ}$S) mean geopotential height anomalies ($Z'$)\footnote{At
  1000~hPa monthly mean $Z'$ is highly correlated ($r=0.98$) with the SAM
  index}. Figure \ref{fig:gph_lag_corr}(a) shows the correlation of $Z'$ in
ERA-Interim with the GloSea5 ensemble mean hindcast values. Values are smoothed
with a 30-day running mean before correlations are calculated, and plotted such
that values for 15th September represent the correlation of the ERA-Interim and
GloSea5 ensemble mean September mean values (without this smoothing, there are
noisier but still significant correlations in a similar pattern). Between
1st-9th August the ensemble mean is taken as the average of the 10 initialized
ensemble members, and the average of all 15 ensemble members is used after this
date.

\begin{figure}[t]
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/lag_corr_crop.pdf}\\
  \caption[Lag-height correlation of GloSea5 polar cap geopotential height]{(a)
    Correlation of GloSea5 ensemble mean polar cap (60-90$^{\circ}$S)
    geopotential height anomalies ($Z'$) with ERA-Interim values from
    1996--2009, as a function of time and height. (b) Correlation of ERA-Interim
    from 1979--2010 values with those predicted by a linear statistical model
    based on $Z'$ at 10~hPa on 1st August. (c) As (b) but based on the July-mean
    Ni\~no-4 index. All values are smoothed with a 30-day running mean before
    correlations are calculated. The contour interval is 0.1 and all colored
    regions are greater than zero at the 95\% confidence interval, using a
    bootstrap test at each time at height. The blue dashed line indicates the
    approximate polar cap mean tropopause level
    \citep{Wilcox2012}.} \label{fig:gph_lag_corr}
\end{figure}


As would be expected from the initialization of GloSea5 from ERA-Interim data,
correlations are high in both the troposphere and the stratosphere for the
August mean, due to predictability on weather timescales. However, tropospheric
and lower-stratospheric skill rapidly decays and becomes statistically
insignificant throughout September. In contrast, stratospheric correlations
remain statistically significant throughout the hindcast simulation, and as high
as 0.8 through to mid-October (corresponding to a 2 month lead time). 

Importantly, the region of high levels of stratospheric skill descends with time
and is present at the tropopause at the same time as a re-emergence of
significant tropospheric skill in mid-October. This re-emergence cannot be
accounted for by the persistence of tropospheric anomalies, so must be the
result of the effect of another predictable signal on the extratropical
tropospheric circulation. An obvious candidate for such a signal is the polar
stratosphere, since this remains predictable throughout the hindcast period. The
re-emergence of tropospheric skill also occurs at the same time as the strongest
observed coupling between the stratosphere and troposphere found in other
studies \citep[e.g.,][]{Thompson2005, Simpson2011}.

In order to determine the stratospheric influence on tropospheric skill, a
simple statistical forecast model is formed, which has as its only input the
initial conditions of the Antarctic stratosphere. A leave-one-out cross
validation procedure is employed; ERA-Interim values are used to calculate the
linear regression of $Z'$ at 10~hPa on 1st August with $Z'$ at all other times
and heights from 31 of the 32 years from 1979--2009. This regression is then
used to produce a hindcast of the 32nd year based on its $Z'$ at 10~hPa on 1st
August. The method ensures that no information from the hindcast year enters the
model. The process is then repeated to make hindcasts of all 32 years.

Figure \ref{fig:gph_lag_corr}(b) shows the correlation of 30-day running means
of these statistical hindcasts with ERA-Interim values. As might be expected,
skill is initially high in the mid-stratosphere but not the troposphere. As with
the GloSea5 hindcasts, the region of high skill descends with time, and
statistically significant correlations re-emerge in the troposphere throughout
October. This demonstrates that skillful forecasts of the Antarctic troposphere
during October can be produced based only on knowledge of $Z'$ in the
mid-stratosphere on 1st August. It also suggests that the re-emergence of
tropospheric skill in the GloSea5 hindcasts in October is likely to be caused by
predictable stratospheric anomalies which descend with time.

However, it is also possible that a third factor both influences the 1st August
stratosphere and the October and November tropsophere. ENSO may be such a
factor, since it has been shown to influence both the surface SAM
\citep{Lim2013} and the polar stratosphere \citep{Hurwitz2011}. The influence of
ENSO is therefore assessed using the same leave-one-out cross-validation
procedure, and shown in Figure \ref{fig:gph_lag_corr}(c). The input to the
statistical model is the July mean Ni\~no-4 index (sea-surface temperatures
averaged over $5^{\circ}$S-$5^{\circ}$N, $160^{\circ}$-$150^{\circ}$W) from the
HadISST1 data set \citep{Rayner2003}. Similar results are obtained using the
July mean Ni\~no-3.4 index or Southern Oscillation Index. The Ni\~no-4
index-based statistical hindcasts show some significant tropospheric
correlations around 1st September and in November, but not during
October. Hence, ENSO cannot account for the October re-emergence of tropospheric
skill in the GloSea5 hindcasts, at least in this statistical model.

Importantly, the longer 32-year (1979--2010) period of the ERA-Interim
reanalysis (rather than the 14-year (1996--2009) period of the GloSea5
hindcasts) is used for the statistical analysis presented in Figures
\ref{fig:gph_lag_corr}(b) and (c). The correlation between both the 1st August
$Z'$ at 10~hPa and the July mean Ni\~no-4 index with the SON SAM is not
statistically significantly different during 1996--2009 compared with
1979--2010. This was tested using a bootstrap test, which correlates subsets of
14 years from the (detrended) 32 years. Hence correlations found for the shorter
period are deemed to be a marginal distribution of those over the longer period,
so a more robust measure of sources of predictability can be obtained by
studying the longer observational record.

Similar features are seen if the statistical hindcasts are repeated using the
shorter period, although tropospheric skill from the polar vortex emerges later
(in November), and that from Ni\~no-4 earlier in (in October; not shown). These
statistical hindcasts also show lower skill than the GloSea5 hindcasts at almost
all times in both the tropsophere and stratosphere, which may indicate the
importance of non-linearities or the influence of other external factors which
can be captured by the full dynamical model.

\section{Discussion}

We have demonstrated that Antarctic total column ozone amounts are predictable
up to four months in advance during the austral spring, even with a model which
lacks interactive chemistry. While using such a model has the advantage of being
less computationally expensive than a chemistry-climate model, there are also
some drawbacks. Primarily, the model will not be able to simulate zonal
asymmetries in ozone concentrations and their influence on the stratospheric
circulation or the feedback between ozone concentrations and stratospheric
temperatures. Both these factors have been shown to be important in driving
long-term trends in the SAM as a result of ozone depletion \citep{Thompson2002a,
  Crook2008, Waugh2009}.

Perhaps more relevant for seasonal forecasts is the fact that we have not been
able to determine whether the observed strong correlation between the
stratospheric circulation and Antarctic ozone concentrations is dominated by a
chemical or dynamical mechanism. If the relationship is dominated by a chemical
mechanism, whereby enhanced descent over the pole inhibits the activation of
ozone-depleting substances, we would expect the correlation to weaken as
concentrations of these substances return to pre-industrial levels. Accurate
forecasts of ozone with models lacking interactive chemistry would then not be
possible. On the other hand, if the mechanism is largely dynamical, whereby
transport of ozone-rich air from the tropics is the important factor, we would
not expect the relationship to change in time.  Although a study to distinguish
these mechanisms has been carried out for chemistry-climate models
\citep{Garny2011}, it has not been possible to do so in observations. In either
case, we do not expect the relationship to break down soon, as concentrations of
ozone-depleting substances are not projected to return to 1980 levels until the
late 21st century \citep{WMO2010}.

The correlation skill of 0.64 (95\% confidence interval: [0.18,0.92]) for the
SON mean SAM in the GloSea5 hindcasts is greater but not inconsistent with that
found by \citet{Lim2013}. They report a correlation of 0.40 for the SON mean SAM
from 1st August initialized forecasts over 1981--2010 using the Predictive Ocean
and Atmosphere Model for Australia, version 2 (POAMA2). Over the comparable
period of 1996--2009, they find a correlation of 0.54 (Harry Hendon, personal
communication).  Significantly, POAMA2 has only two model levels in the
stratosphere, and so may be unable to simulate the stratosphere-troposphere
coupling described here. \citet{Lim2013} attribute their results to the
influence of ENSO through a tropospheric teleconnection. This is not
inconsistent with our result shown in Figure \ref{fig:gph_lag_corr}(c), since we
find significant tropospheric predictability from ENSO during November, the same
time that \citet{Lim2013} find the strongest correlation between ENSO and the
SAM. The lack of discrepancy between these two systems despite their different
stratospheric resolutions may be a result of the ENSO/SAM connection being too
weak in GloSea5, or simply that the relatively short hindcast period used here
prevents a statistically significant difference being detected.

Despite this significant correlation skill in hindcasts of the SAM, it is clear
from Figure \ref{fig:sam_ts} that the standard deviation of the GloSea5 ensemble
mean SAM is much less than that of observations. The signal-to-noise ratio
(ratio of the standard deviation of the ensemble mean to that of all ensemble
members) is just 0.4. For a `perfect' forecast system (one in which observations
are indistinguishable from an ensemble member), the signal-to-noise ratio and
correlation are directly related \citep{Kumar2009}, so that the expected
correlation would be just 0.3. The fact that it is greater than this is because
the average correlation between ensemble members and observations is much
greater than that between pairs of ensemble members. A similar but smaller
difference is also found for the stratospheric polar vortex forecasts, and this
is also observed by \citet{Scaife2013} for the NAO in the same system. These
results mean that individual ensemble members have a smaller predictable signal
than observations.

Given this result, it might be expected that more skillful predictions could be
obtained with a larger ensemble size. To illustrate the variation of hindcast
skill with ensemble size we systematically sample smaller sets of forecasts from
the full 15 members for each year, following the method of
\citet{Scaife2013}. This is repeated many times and an average value for a given
sample size calculated. This variation of correlation skill with ensemble size
for both the SON mean SAM and stratospheric polar vortex winds is shown in
Figure \ref{fig:corr_ens_size_sh}. These curves closely follow the theoretical
relationship of \citet{Murphy1990}, which relies only on the mean correlation
between pairs of ensemble members, $\langle r_{mm} \rangle$, and the mean
correlation between individual ensemble members and observations,
$\langle r_{mo} \rangle$, given by
\begin{equation}
r = \frac{\langle r_{mo} \rangle \sqrt{n}}{\sqrt{1+(n-1)\langle r_{mm} \rangle}}
\end{equation} 
where $r$ is the ensemble mean correlation, and $n$ is the ensemble size. These
curves are shown in Figure \ref{fig:corr_ens_size_sh}, along with their
asymptote for an infinite sized ensemble. Although the stratospheric forecasts
cannot be greatly improved with a larger ensemble size in the current system,
greater correlation scores of the SAM could be achieved with an ensemble size
near 30. Although the large uncertainty range does not allow a strong statement
about potential predictability, the asymptote near 0.8 is similar to that found
by \citet{Scaife2013} using a longer hindcast and greater ensemble size for the
DJF NAO.

The dynamics of other seasons are different to those of the austral spring, so
results presented here do not imply significant skill in prediction of the SAM
at other times. For instance, \citet{Shaw2010} find that a favourable state for
downward wave coupling between the stratosphere and troposphere is present only
during September to December in the SH. Indeed, the 1-month lead time ensemble
mean correlation of the DJF SAM with ERA-Interim is lower than that for SON at
$r=0.39$ (95\% confidence interval: [0.15,0.63]).

\begin{figure}[t]
  \centering
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=0.6\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/corr_ens_size_crop.pdf}\\
  \caption[Variation of GloSea5 forecast skill with ensemble size]{GloSea5
    ensemble mean correlation with ERA-Interim as a function of ensemble size
    for the SON mean $\overline{U}$ at 10~hPa and 60$^{\circ}$S and SON mean SAM
    (thick lines). A theoretical estimate of the variation of correlation with
    ensemble size is shown in each case (thin solid lines), along with its
    asymptote for an infinite sized ensemble (dashed lines). Error bars
    represent the 95\% uncertainty range for the correlation of the full
    15-member ensemble, calculated using a bootstrap
    test.}\label{fig:corr_ens_size_sh}
\end{figure}


\section{Conclusions}

Using a set of seasonal hindcasts initialized at the start of the austral
spring, we have demonstrated skillful prediction of the interannual variability
of the Antarctic stratospheric polar vortex at seasonal lead times. This
includes capturing an increased likelihood of the 2002 SSW which is the most
extreme year in the ensemble mean and has the only ensemble member in 14 years
which simulates a SSW (although another is close to simulating a SSW in
1997). Because this variability is observed to be closely correlated with
Antarctic column ozone amounts, we are able to perform skillful predictions of
interannual variability in Antarctic ozone depletion.

We also find significant skill in hindcasts of the spring mean SAM index.  By
studying the variation of this skill with time and height, we suggest that this
skill is influenced by stratospheric anomalies which descend with time and are
coupled with the troposphere in October and November. In fact, the influence of
the stratosphere is such that skillful statistical predictions of the October
SAM can be made using only information from 1st August in the mid-stratosphere.

Assuming that the 14 year period studied here is representative of future years,
these results suggest that it may now be possible to make skillful seasonal
forecasts of interannual variations in springtime ozone depletion and large
scale weather patterns across the Southern Hemisphere.

 \begin{figure}[p] \vspace*{-3cm} \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=40pc]{figures/chapter-seasonal/zm_winds_nh_poststamp.pdf}
 \caption[Timeseries of $\overline{U}$ at 60$^{\circ}$N, 10~hPa, for all GloSea5
ensemble members.]{Timeseries of zonal-mean zonal wind in the Arctic polar
vortex ($60^{\circ}$N, 10~hPa) in the ERA-Interim reanalysis (thick black lines)
and the GloSea5 ensemble hindcasts (thin coloured lines). Individual ensemble
members are initialised from dates centred on November 1st. }
 \label{fig:nh_poststamp}
 \end{figure}

 \begin{figure}[p] \vspace*{-3cm} \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=40pc]{figures/chapter-seasonal/zm_winds_sh_poststamp.pdf}
 \caption[Timeseries of $\overline{U}$ at 60$^{\circ}$S, 10~hPa, for all GloSea5
ensemble members.]{As figure \ref{fig:nh_poststamp} but for the zonal-mean zonal
wind in the Antarctic polar vortex ($60^{\circ}$S, 10~hPa), and ensemble members
initialised from dates centred on August 1st.}
 \label{fig:sh_poststamp}
 \end{figure}

 \begin{figure}[p] \vspace*{-3cm} \centering
 \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/chapter-seasonal/lag_height_corr_obs.pdf}
 \caption[Lag-height correlation of $Z'$ at 10~hPa and 1000~hPa.]{Correlation of
   ERA-Interim (1979--2010) Z' at 10~hPa, 70~hPa, and 1000~hPa with Z' at other
   times and lags. Values are smoothed with a 30-day running mean before
   correlations are calculated, and colours represent correlations that are 95\%
   significant from zero according to a bootstrap test.}
 \label{fig:lag_height_corr_obs}
 \end{figure}

\begin{figure}[t]
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/DJF_SAM.pdf}\\
  \caption[GloSea5 predictions of the SAM.]{DJF mean Southern Annular Mode (SAM)
    index in individual GloSea5 hindcast ensemble members (dots), ensemble mean
    (dashed green curve) and ERA-Interim (solid green curve). The SAM is
    calculated from mean sea-level pressure data, and hindcasts initialised near
    1st November. The correlation of the ensemble mean and ERA-Interim values is
    0.39}\label{fig:djf_sam_ts}
\end{figure}


\begin{subappendices}
\section{Choice of time period for statistical forecast}

\begin{figure}[t]
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=0.7\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/SAM_SOI_corr.pdf}\\
  \caption[Correlation of the SOI with the SAM.]{Histogram of correlations of
    random 14-year samples of detrended June-July SOI with October-November
    SAM. Also shown is the correlation over the 1996--2009 hindcast period. Grey
  shading indicates the $<2.5$\% and $>97.5$\% ranges.}\label{fig:sam_soi_corr}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[t]
  \noindent\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,angle=0]{figures/chapter-seasonal/lag_height_short.pdf}\\
  \caption[Lag-height correlation of GloSea5 polar cap geopotential height]{As
    Figure \ref{fig:gph_lag_corr} but all analysis restricted to the 1996--2009
    period.}\label{fig:lag_height_short}
\end{figure}

\end{subappendices}


%%% Local Variables:
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "thesis"
%%% End:
